\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:intro}

% TODO (James): intro historie skal omstruktureres så den starter mere blødt og er mere generel.
% Lige nu starter den hårdt ud.

Bone samples are most commonly analyzed by extracting histologies and examining
their two-dimensional structure with light microscopy. This method has several
drawbacks. First and foremost, it is destructive: In addition to the obvious
issue that the histology must be cut from the full sample, the sawing process
can contaminate soft tissue with bone dust, or leave surface scratches that
complicate automatic image analysis. Secondly, histology by its nature only
gives a two-dimensional slice of the full three-dimensional picture - most
important biological structures are inherently three-dimensional, and limiting
analysis to 2D severely restricts the types of questions we can answer.

Synchrotron Radiation micro-tomography (SRµCT) offers a non-destructive
high-quality alternative to histology for detailed analysis of bone biopsies.
\cite{torsten2018} quantified the uncertainty of 2D histology for four common
bone analyses, and found that the choice of sampling plane for histological
analysis incurred a significant uncertainty in the results, whereas the full
volumetric analysis of SRµCT tomograms did not.

The high brilliance and collimation of synchrotron radiation yields
particularly faithful 3D images, as common distortive X-ray effects seen in
hospital-grade setups such as beam hardening and projection artifacts are
minimized. The high fidelity makes SRµCT attractive for conducting advanced
medical image analyses with trustworthy results.

However, while image distortion effects are much reduced compared to laboratory
X-ray tomography, they are not eliminated, and numerical analysis and
computations on the images must still be conducted carefully. Boundary effects
near sample surfaces, ring artifacts from sensor faults, and especially
distortion near high-contrast transitions, make accurate tissue classification
difficult in regions where this distortion is significant. \cite{sporring}
found that, while they could accurately classify bone tissue in the middle
regions of the tomograms, they were not able to obtain good bone-to-implant
contact evaluation (BIC), as evidenced by poor correlation with histological
analysis of the same samples.

\subsection*{Position within state of the art}

Numerous techniques exist for working with large and complex 3d segmentations.
Suitable methods are chosen on the basis of what works best for the particular
data and analysis being done. Comprehensive literature reviews give a detailed
overview of available methods and their individual challenges
\cite{seg_literature_review}. Alternatives include software applications that
require different levels of manual
input~\cite{software_pore3d,software_itk_snap,software_dragonfly,software_avizo}.
Such manual approaches are however not of interest here, since they are highly
impractical to annotate for the data sizes presented in this work. Neither do
they form a fair comparison against the fully automated approach as will be
presented here.

Common for all techniques, is that they only work in few specialized cases and
work poorly when applied on different data. To our knowledge, no fully automated
open-source segmentation method exists that can accurately classify soft tissue
close to dense implants of this type and scale. Existing options employed in the
medical industry mostly consist of proprietary software as referenced above.

This work presents a fully automatic computational method which discovers
probabilistic models for the distortions incurred by the physical effects in
high-resolution X-ray CT such as SRµCT to reverse them and produce accurate
tissue classification even in regions where these effects are significant. The
proposed technique has the potential to be applied to segmentation challenges in
various material types that exhibit significant attenuation differences. It
exploits two properties, which are needed to hold for the method to work: i)
very high resolution is used to build statistical models as functions of space,
and ii) the effects to be countered must vary continuously over space so that we
can track how voxel frequency distributions are distorted throughout the image.
We apply the method to the same dataset of micrometer-resolution SRµCT bone
tomograms studied in \cite{torsten2018} and in \cite{sporring}, to achieve
faithful tissue classification close to the titanium implant surface. The
implementation is open-source, targets multi-CPU and multi-GPU systems, and is
available at \href{https://github.com/jamesavery/maxibone}
{https://github.com/jamesavery/maxibone}.

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "main"
%%% End:
